# iptables Troubleshooting

## iptables stat

> [https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/384880/how-to-get-metrics-about-dropped-traffic-via-iptables](https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/384880/how-to-get-metrics-about-dropped-traffic-via-iptables)



```
$ sudo iptables -L -n -v -x
Chain INPUT (policy DROP 0 packets, 0 bytes)
 pkts bytes target prot opt in out source    destination 
   39 22221 ACCEPT udp  --  *  *   0.0.0.0/0  0.0.0.0/0 udp spts:67:68 dpts:67:68
 ...
  182 43862 LOG    all  --  *  *   0.0.0.0/0  0.0.0.0/0 LOG flags 0 level 4 prefix "input_drop: "
  182 43862 REJECT all  --  *  *   0.0.0.0/0  0.0.0.0/0 reject-with icmp-host-prohibited
```

shows no dropped packets on my local network but 182 rejected with icmp and a log message such as the one you listed. The last two rules in the configuration with a policy of DROP were

```
  -A INPUT -j LOG --log-prefix "input_drop: "
  -A INPUT -j REJECT --reject-with icmp-host-prohibited
```

You can zero the counters for all chains with `iptables -Z`.



> - [Istio- Improve iptables debugability #33965](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/33965)

- Iptables allows inserting comments (`--comment`) which can help explain why we have certain rules.
- Iptables allows inserting logs (`iptables -A INPUT -j LOG`, for example). This could be helpful to debug the flow of traffic. I don't think you can add a log a specific line, but for every rule we create we can make a log statement with the same match I think.



Like need `echo 1 | sudo tee /proc/sys/net/netfilter/nf_log_all_netns` to get logs in containers



## TCP Connection Analysis Why the Socket Remains in the FIN_WAIT_1 State Post Killing the Process

> [https://www.alibabacloud.com/blog/tcp-connection-analysis-why-the-socket-remains-in-the-fin-wait-1-state-post-killing-the-process_595798](https://www.alibabacloud.com/blog/tcp-connection-analysis-why-the-socket-remains-in-the-fin-wait-1-state-post-killing-the-process_595798)

According to the preceding analysis, further focus on the impacts of iptables (Netfilter) and TC mechanisms on packets on the precondition that no big bugs are found. It turns out that many iptables rules are configured on the ECS instance. Use `iptables -nvL` to print the match count of each rule, or use the log writing method. The following snippet shows an example.

```
# 记录下new state的报文的日志
iptables -A INPUT -p tcp -m state --state NEW -j LOG --log-prefix "[iptables] INPUT NEW: "
```







## Log internal conntrack information

> [https://fedoramagazine.org/network-address-translation-part-4-conntrack-troubleshooting/](https://fedoramagazine.org/network-address-translation-part-4-conntrack-troubleshooting/)

The “_net.netfilter.nf\_conntrack\_log\_invalid″_ sysctl is used to set kernel parameters to get more information about why a packet is considered invalid. The default setting, 0, disables this logging. Positive numbers (up to 255) specify for which protocol more information will be logged. For example, _6_ would print more information for tcp, while 17 would provide more information for udp. The numbers are identical to those found in the file _/etc/protocols._ The special value _255_ enables debug logging for all protocol trackers.

You may need to set a specific logging backend. Use “_sysctl -a | grep nf\_log_” to see what log backends are currently in use. NONE means that no backend is set. Example output:

```bash
# sysctl -a | grep nf_log
net.netfilter.nf_log.10 = NONE
net.netfilter.nf_log.2 = NONE
net.netfilter.nf_log_all_netns = 0
```



2 is ipv4, 3 is arp, 7 is used for bridge logging and 10 for ipv6. For connection tracking only ipv4 (2) and ipv6 (10) are relevant. The last sysctl shown here – _nf\_log\_all\_netns_ – is set to the default 0 to prevent other namespaces from flooding the system log. It may be set to 1 to debug issues in another network namespace.

### Logger configuration

This command will print a list of available log modules:

```
# ls /lib/modules/$(uname -r)/kernel/net/netfilter/log /lib/modules/$(uname -r)/kernel/net/ip/netfilter/log*
```



The command:

```
# modprobe nf_log_ipv4
```



loads the ipv4 log module. If multiple log modules are loaded you can set the preferred/active logger with sysctl. For example:

```
# sudo sysctl net.netfilter.nf_log.2=nf_log_ipv4
```



tells the kernel to log ipv4 packet events to syslog/journald. This only affects log messages generated by conntrack debugging. Log messages generated by rules like “`ipables -j NFLOG`” or the _LOG_ target do not change as the rule itself already specifies to log type to use (nfnetlink and syslog/journald respectively).

After this, debug messages will appear in ulogd (if configured via nfnetlink) or the system log (if nf\_log\_ipv4 is the log backend).

### Example debug output

The following examples occur with the settings created using _“sudo sysctl net.netfilter.nf\_log.2=nf\_log\_ipv4”_ and “_sudo sysctl net.netfilter.nf\_conntrack\_log\_invalid=6_“.

```
 nf_ct_proto_6: invalid packet ignored in state ESTABLISHED SRC=10.47.217.34 DST=192.168.0.17 LEN=60 DF SPT=443 DPT=47832 SEQ=389276 ACK=3130 WINDOW=65160 ACK SYN

nf_ct_proto_6: ACK is over the upper bound (ACKed data not seen yet) SRC=10.3.1.1 DST=192.168.0.1 LEN=60 DF SPT=443 DPT=49135 SEQ= ...
```



This dump contains the packet contents (allowing correlation with tcpdump packet capture of the flow, for example) plus a reason why the packet was tagged as INVALID.

### Dynamic Printk

If further information is needed, there are log statements in the conntrack module that can be enabled at run-time with the dynamic debugging infrastructure.

To check if this feature is available, use the following command:

```
# sudo grep nf_conntrack_proto_tcp /sys/kernel/debug/dynamic_debug/control
```



If the conntrack module is loaded and the dynamic debug feature is available, the output is similar to this:

```
net/netfilter/nf_conntrack_proto_tcp.c:1104 [nf_conntrack]nf_conntrack_tcp_packet =_ "syn=%i ack=%i fin=%i rst=%i old=%i new=%i\012"

net/netfilter/nf_conntrack_proto_tcp.c:1102 [nf_conntrack]nf_conntrack_tcp_packet =_ "tcp_conntracks: " net/netfilter/nf_conntrack_proto_tcp.c:1005 [nf_conntrack]nf_conntrack_tcp_packet =_ "nf_ct_tcp: Invalid dir=%i index=%u ostate=%u\012"

net/netfilter/nf_conntrack_proto_tcp.c:999 [nf_conntrack]nf_conntrack_tcp_packet =_ "nf_ct_tcp: SYN proxy client keep alive\012"
```





Each line shows the location of a default-disabled debug _printk_ statement. _printk_ is a C function from the Linux kernel interface that prints messages to the kernel log. The name of the file in the linux kernel source code comes first, followed by the line number. The square brackets contain the name of the kernel module that this source file is part of. The combination of file name and line number allows enabling or disabling these _printk_ statements. This command:

```
# sudo echo "file net/netfilter/nf_conntrack_proto_tcp.c line 1005 +p" &gt; /sys/kernel/debug/dynamic_debug/control
```



will enable the _printk_ statement shown in line 1005 of [net/netfilter/nf\_conntrack\_proto\_tcp.c](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/net/netfilter/nf_conntrack_proto_tcp.c?id=e2ef5203c817a60bfb591343ffd851b6537370ff#n1005). The same command, with “_+p_” replaced by “_\-p_“, disables this log line again. This facility is not unique to connection tracking: many parts of the kernel provide such debug messages. This technique is useful when things go wrong and more information about the conntrack internal state is needed. A dedicated howto about the dynamic debug feature is available in the kernel documentation [here](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/Documentation/admin-guide/dynamic-debug-howto.rst?id=e85d92b3bc3b7062f18b24092a65ec427afa8148).

### The unconfirmed and dying lists

A newly allocated conntrack entry is first added to the unconfirmed list. Once the packet is accepted by all iptables/nftables rules, the conntrack entry moves from the unconfirmed list to the main connection tracking table. The dying list is the inverse: when a entry is removed from the table, it is placed on the dying list. The entry is freed once all packets that reference the flow have been dropped. This means that a conntrack entry is always on a list: Either the unconfirmed list, the dying list, or the conntrack hash table list. Most entries will be in the hash table.

If removal from the table is due to a timeout, no further references exist and the entry is freed immediately. This is what will typically happen with UDP flows. For TCP, conntrack entries are normally removed due to a special TCP packets such as the last TCP acknowledgment or a TCP reset. This is because TCP, unlike UDP, signals state transitions, such as connection closure. The entry is moved from the table to the dying list. The conntrack entry is then released after the network stack has processed the “last packet” packet.

#### Examining these lists

```bash
# sudo conntrack -L unconfirmed
# sudo conntrack -L dying
```



These two commands show the lists. A large discrepancy between the number of active connections (_sudo conntrack -C_) and the content of the connection tracking table (_sudo conntrack -L_) indicate a problem. Entries that remain on either one of these lists for long time periods indicate a kernel bug. Expected time ranges are in the order of a few microseconds.



